We thought it might be a truck driving by.
When it happened again, we got up
and started reading the news on the Internet,
and we found out that there were explosions
happening in all the cities.
My mom awoke from her sleep
to sirens sounding all over the city.
Of course, we were very anxious
and turned on the TV immediately,
but we didn’t even have
to look for information
because all the channels were already talking
about the fact that war had started.
We just immediately
started praying to Jehovah,
calling friends and close ones
and asking how they were,
and waiting for guidance from the brothers.
At 5:30 a.m.,
a brother from Kyiv called us
and said that the bombs were landing in Kyiv.
We immediately got up, woke up the children,
and told them about the situation.
And we didn’t let the children go to school.
We realized that our lives had changed.
We read the daily text, but I want to note
that this scripture is well-known for us.
It used to be a yeartext
and, of course, we knew it.
But at that moment, it sounded special.
I mean, it was like personal guidance,
such a personal answer
from Jehovah to everyone.
And I understood what I had to do.
And that day,
brothers created a Zoom meeting
that ran for the whole day.
And brothers and sisters
could connect via Zoom to preach,
talk to each other, and support each other.
We were all together.
Every day it became more difficult.
It became more difficult to deliver food,
and the food became more expensive.
People started to panic,
which led to panic buying of medicines
and basic staple products.
Yes, before that, during the pandemic,
for two years now,
brothers had been constantly reminding us
of the necessity of go bags.
And then, closer to the war,
reminders also began to come from brothers
about not only stocking up on such backpacks
but also about checking
what condition they were in.
And it was also recommended to stock up
on food for two months in advance.
When the war started,
we were really frightened
because I was
in my ninth month of pregnancy,
and I could go into labor at any moment.
We prayed a lot.
We wanted to work out what to do next,
what the right thing for us to do was.
We weren’t sure
what was going on or how it would end.
But when we heard that next to us
they bombed a hospital
and they bombed a dormitory, we understood
we had to find a safer place.
It was then that my husband
made the decision that we should go.
We couldn’t leave
because I wasn’t able to travel.
Even to transport me
from one room to the other was a problem.
So the situation
really was such that in our case
it was very difficult to leave.
And it was very hard to stay
because almost every day
the area was being shelled.
My dad is
in quite a difficult condition right now.
He is completely blind with poor hearing;
he had a stroke
and broke his hip a few months ago.
So now he is completely bedridden
and requires constant care.
Katya’s mom is hard of hearing,
and she broke her arm.
It is our duty to take care of our parents.
It is a commandment that Jehovah gave,
but we did not know
how we could do it in this situation.
When the war started,
in the first days of it,
my grandfather had a second stroke,
and worries about him
were added to the situation.
We had to take care of him
because he could not eat.
Only my mom, my older brother,
my grandmother, and I
are Jehovah’s Witnesses in our family.
My dad was worried about my safety.
We understood that out of our whole family,
I was the only one who could leave.
Before we left, my husband
called an elder from our congregation.
He and his wife were already
in the west of Ukraine at the time,
and they gave us a lot of advice.
They gave us advice
on how to behave at roadblocks,
that we should hide our phones
and not take photos of anything.
They were advising us
on which villages to go through
because there were
very big traffic jams at the time
and people were stopped in some traffic jams
for 10 to 12 hours.
There were no lights.
We drove large sections
of the road in one go,
constantly praying
that we wouldn’t get a flat tire,
that the car wouldn’t break down,
and that we wouldn’t get stuck in a field.
Before each checkpoint, we were so nervous
because local militia
when drunk could be unpredictable,
but since they had weapons
—combat weapons—
we were afraid not only of the invaders
but of the locals as well.
I don’t think we ever prayed
as much as we did
during those hours on the road.
My husband tried to stay as calm as possible
and reassure me so that I wouldn’t worry.
A sister found out
that there would be an evacuation train,
and we kind of wanted to get on it;
but we were not sure that we would.
But this time, with prayers,
she managed to organize the transportation
and both our families went.
It was amazing that this train had a special
carriage for people with disabilities,
and we were taken to this carriage,
and the train
was even delayed until we sat down.
They were waiting for us.
Before we left, we informed the elders
that we had made up our minds
and that we were going.
The brothers sent us
a certain amount of money.
They said, “This is to help you.”
And when we boarded the train,
we found out
that we had to pay for the train,
although before that,
all evacuation trains were free.
They told us the amount for the tickets,
and it was exactly the same
as what the brothers had given us.
The only opportunity
for me to leave was by evacuation train.
Usually a compartment
is designed for 4 people;
in ours there were 13 of us.
On the train, I was traveling
with a family from my congregation.
In order to reduce our worries
and switch to something positive,
we decided to take the opportunity
and preach to the people.
We drove for 16 hours,
and we arrived very late.
In Lviv, a group of police approached
and took me
to the Security Service of Ukraine.
Since I have a Russian passport,
I am essentially like an enemy to them.
I knew that Jehovah was with Dad,
that He would protect him,
and that most likely
he would not be dragged there to prison
or something like that.
But I was worried that they might simply
not let us go further
and that we would stay in Ukraine.
I sat and waited.
I prayed to Jehovah.
And this helped me
not to focus on my negative thoughts
but to trust Jehovah completely.
They began to incite me
to say such slogans as
“Glory to Ukraine!”
I answered:
“I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
“and we take a neutral position in this war.
“We do not support the Russian side,
but I also cannot glorify
some other country.”
And then he told me to curse Putin.
I said, “Well, since I am a believer,
I cannot speak swear words
so I cannot say this either.”
And the policeman said:
“Yes, I know your people.
They don’t want to defend their homeland.”
I replied, “Well, if I were a conscript,
I would fight against Ukraine now,
since I am Russian.”
He said: “Well, then save your family.
Go with God, Alexsei!”
He gave me back my documents
and wished me a good journey.
We waited at the border for about 17 hours.
The difficulty was that it was very cold.
The car got cold quickly,
and there were no toilets.
As it was our turn to be checked,
we spoke to the female border guard
and explained to her
that I could go into labor at any time
and that I really needed my husband’s help
—I couldn’t even carry my own bag.
Then she told me that if I wanted,
I could stay in Ukraine,
but there was no way
my husband would be allowed to leave.
Our final destination
was the city of Chełm in Poland,
where we arrived.
And there was an outburst of emotions
when the volunteers
quickly brought us to the sisters
and we saw the jw.org sign.
There were so many emotions.
That is, well, it took our breath away,
and we just couldn’t speak, and now, indeed,
this was the moment
when we understood that this is it;
we were saved!
When we arrived at the Kingdom Hall,
we were feeling really emotional.
We were very worried and nervous
about what was going to happen.
But once we entered the Kingdom Hall,
we were able to calm down.
There were a lot
of local brothers and sisters
who greeted us with hugs.
Many even had tears in their eyes
when they saw
that I was going to have a baby soon.
At that moment, we realized
that Jehovah and our brotherhood
will take care of us as their own family
in whatever circumstances we find ourselves.
I sat in the Kingdom Hall
and didn’t know what to plan next.
The elder who was on shift
at the Kingdom Hall
took time for me,
and he encouraged me very much.
He acknowledged everything
I had gone through and comforted me,
letting me know that I was now safe.
He assured me that Jehovah is with me
and will continue to support me
and that I have no reason to fear.
I remember a moment
when I went outside in the evening
and the view of the Carpathian Mountains
opened up to me.
The birds were singing.
It strengthened me so much.
And I remembered the thought
where a brother said
that if Jehovah created all of this,
won’t he help you?
And, well, later I felt that power on me
when everything began to resolve so quickly,
and I didn’t even think
that it would resolve that way.
My biggest fear
is probably the fear of the unknown,
but now we see
that there is nothing to be afraid of.
There was a Disaster Relief Committee
that helped to accommodate refugees.
And the sisters working with the committee
were looking for routes
and looking for transport
—buses, trains, and planes.
We were accommodated
with an amazing family
where we felt really comfortable.
We felt completely understood.
It is simply incredible.
Of course, Jehovah
has accompanied us all these years.
All these years
we have been feeling his help,
but now it is just like an avalanche
—an avalanche of miracles, help, and support.
Different brothers and sisters
began to visit us straightaway,
and each time there was someone new.
And they always brought some bags or boxes.
And for the non-Witnesses,
it was like a miracle.
And they kept asking:
“Do you know them?
Are these your relatives?”
“No, we have never seen them before.”
“Why are they helping you?”
Oh, it was such a good witness.
On March 24, exactly a month
after the war began,
Daniil and I
gave birth to a beautiful baby girl.
It was a great help
that a sister who could translate
was present in the delivery room.
This made me feel calmer.
We try to speak
at every possible opportunity,
sending each other text messages
and communicating via videoconferencing.
I send Daniil videos and photos
of our little girl, Miroslava.
And we constantly
reassure each other of our love
and that we appreciate each other very much.
Feeling forced to move to another country
is very difficult.
But thanks to Jehovah,
I have become convinced
that his organization
really functions as one body.
And I am very happy to be part of it.
The brotherhood
—these are the people
waiting for you with open arms.
We felt that
it was Jehovah
who personally helped us.
It is really evident that a lot of refugees
from Ukraine who come here
are alone with their problems,
and it is very difficult for them.
How much easier it is for us
because we have
a friendly brotherhood with us!
And although we are in a foreign country,
we feel at home.
All thanks go to Jehovah!